# associational-defenses-Kingman

Exclosure experiment and transect survey at Kingman freshwater tidal marsh restoration, Washington, DC. Zizania aquatica (annual wild rice) biomass levels and interaction with Nuphar advena (yellow pond-lily or spatterdock) under heavy herbivory.

biomass.csv and grazing.csv: Greenhouse-reared Zizania aquatica were planted in Kingmn Marsh in mid-May 2022. Five treatments (n=10 per treatment) comprised an incomplete factorial experimental design with manipulations of N. advena density and herbivore access. Data was collected on plantings three times over the course of the growing season (Early June, Late June, and Mid-July 2022). On each occasion, grazed stems were counted ("grazed_stem_count"), and plantings were visually inspected for signs of stress (e.g. leaf discoloration or drooping). Grazed stems and leaves had abrupt and jagged ends which made the cause of biomass loss by herbivory easily identifiable. In late August (August 22), Z. aquatica plants were harvested by cutting all aboveground biomass at the soil surface. In the laboratory, wild rice seeds were separated from stems and leaves, and the two components were dried at 60° C for two days and weighed. The mass of the two components were summed to calculate total biomass ("stem_leaves_total", "seed_total", and "overall_total" respectively). 

transect.csv: Eight transects (labeled A-F in the "transect" column), each 12 m long, were established to evenly span the boundary of an Nuphar advena patch, such that 6 m of each transect fell outside the patch in tidal flat, and 6 m within the N. advena patch. At 2 m intervals along each transect (beginning with "quadrat_position" 1 to 6, and on alternating sides note "quadrat_side"), we visually estimated the percent cover of Zizania aquatica ("percent_zizania") and N. advena ("percent_nuphar"), within a 1 x 1 m quadrat and counted the number of grazed Z. aquatica stems ("grazed_stem_count"). Data was collected on 27 July 2022. A publication details experimental methods, analysis, and visualization of data. 

We will update this README with a citation and link to the publication when it becomes available.
